A lack of trained scientists remains a key obstacle in developing bioinformatics research capacity within Lower to Middle Income Countries (LMICs) (Bishop et al 2015). Here we refer to the world bank (https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GNP.PCAP.CD) and OECD (http://www.oecd.org/dac/financing-sustainable-development/development-finance-standards/daclist.htm) definition of a LMIC which defines any country with a gross national income per capita less than $3,955 as a LMIC. Historically, institutions and research groups based in LMICs battled a number of challenges ranging from a shortage of infrastructure, lack of training facilities, poor internet and lack of expertise (Shaffer et. al. 2019; Bishop et al 2015; Karikari 2015). Most of these challenges have been reduced over recent years with more and more LMICs gaining access to more reliable internet, facilities and infrastructure. The Human, Hereditary and Health in Africa consortium (H3Africa) for example is a pan African consortium funded mainly by the NIH, who have driven a range of capacity strengthening initiatives across Africa. H3ABioNet, a pan African bioinformatics network has also made a great push to bring state of the art equipment and facilities to their collaborating partner nodes – many of which have received funding for state of the art computational facilities. Similarly, organisations such as CABANA (Latin America), the Wellcome Trust (UK – regularly delivers training in LMICs) and APBioNet (Asia Pacific Network) among others have engaged in a range of capacity strengthening initiatives within their respective regions in recent years. 
With scientists gaining access to better infrastructure and subsequently needing to analyse increasingly complex datasets, there is a growing deficit in scientists able to perform these complex analyses. There has been a strong focus on training initiatives to combat this deficit with organisations like H3ABioNet developing unique models to overcome typical challenges (Gurwitz et al. 2017; Baichoo et al. 2018). H3ABionet for example, have developed a multiple-delivery-mode model that uses blended learning to reach more than 1000 students annually. The model attempts to mitigate typical challenges in Low resourced settings to provide basic bioinformatics training. 
Training within LMICs requires a well-planned approach and often depends on a unique understanding of their unique challenges in order to provide effective training. It is thus useful to outline what we consider to be key considerations and a range of best practices that may be followed when designing and delivering training in LMICs that will significantly increase a training’s chances of success. We focus here on shorter term training (workshops, jamborees, etc.) but a number of provided best practices will apply to degree programmes as well.
